Add SPV_INTEL_float_controls2 extension preview (#1611)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_float_controls2.asciidoc

Contact
-------

To report problems or to provide input on this extension, please open a new issue at:
https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

Contributors
------------

- Gang Chen, Intel
- Mariusz Merecki, Intel
- Aleksander Us, Intel
- Konstantin Vladimirov, Intel

Notice
------

Copyright (c) 2020 Intel Corporation. All rights reserved.

Status
------

Working Draft

This is a preview extension specification, intended to provide early access to a feature for review and community feedback. When the feature matures, this specification may be released as a formal extension.

Because the interfaces defined by this specification are not final and are subject to change they are not intended to be used by shipping software products. If you are interested in using this feature in your software product, please let us know!

Version
-------

[width="40%",cols="25,25"]
|========================================
| Last Modified Date | 2020-04-24
| Revision           | 2
|========================================

Dependencies
------------

This extension is written against the SPIR-V Specification,
Version 1.5, Revision 2, Unified

This extension requires SPIR-V 1.0.

Overview
--------

> This extension provides new execution modes to control floating-point computations by overriding an implementation’s default behavior for rounding modes and floating point modes.

Reviewer: Could you clarify what the "floating point mode" is?

Author: I'm struggling to find a good wording for describing floating point mode.
Would you be able to help me here and propose some wording?

Author: Updated to the proposed test. Thank you Alexey.

> This extension provides new execution modes to control floating-point computations by overriding an implementation’s default behavior for rounding modes and floating point modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This extension adds execution modes with round to positive infinity and round to negative infinity default rounding.
Execution modes specifying compliance with floating-point arithmetic (IEEE 754) standard are introduced as well.
```

*OpExtension* must be present in the module:

----
OpExtension "SPV_INTEL_float_controls2"
----

Modifications to the SPIR-V Specification, Version 1.5, Revision 2, Unified
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Modify Section 3.6, Execution Mode, add the following rows to the Execution Mode table:

--
[cols="1,20,10,10",options="header",width = "80%"]
|====
  2+^| Execution Mode  | Enabling Capabilities | Extra Operands
| 5620 | *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* +
The default rounding mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be round to positive infinity.
If an instruction is decorated with *FPRoundingMode* or defines a rounding mode in its description, that rounding mode is applied and *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* is ignored.
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| *RoundToInfinityINTEL* | <<Literal, 'Literal'>>  _Target Width_
| 5621 | *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* +
The default rounding mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be round to negative infinity.

> If an instruction is decorated with *FPRoundingMode* or defines a rounding mode in its description, that rounding mode is applied and *RoundingModeRTPNINTEL* is ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If an instruction is decorated with *FPRoundingMode* or defines a rounding mode in its description, that rounding mode is applied and *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* is ignored.
```

Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| *RoundToInfinityINTEL* | <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_
| 5622 | *FloatingPointModeALTINTEL* +
The default floating-point operation mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be the Alternative Floating-Point Mode as specified by the client API.
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| *FloatingPointModeINTEL* | <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_
| 5623 | *FloatingPointModeIEEEINTEL* +

> The default floating-point operation mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be the IEEE Mode as specified by the client API.

Reviewer: It is not clear what "the IEEE Mode" is. Probably the IEEE 754 standard is meant here. Maybe it is worth adding reference to the standard as it is done in the OpenCL  SPIR-V environment spec - https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenCL/specs/2.2/html/OpenCL_Env.html#ieee-754-spec

Author: Yes, I will change to IEEE 754

Author: Changed to IEEE 754

Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>>  _Target Width_ | *RoundToInfinityINTEL*
| 5621 | *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* +
The default rounding mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be round to negative infinity.
If an instruction is decorated with *FPRoundingMode* or defines a rounding mode in its description, that rounding mode is applied and *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* is ignored.
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_ | *RoundToInfinityINTEL*
  | 5622 | *FloatingPointModeALTINTEL* +
The default floating-point operation mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be the Alternative Floating-Point Mode as specified by the client API.
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_ | *FloatingPointModeINTEL*

> | 5623 | *FloatingPointModeIEEEINTEL* +

Reviewer: Having both: execution mode `FloatingPointModeIEEEINTEL` and decoration `FunctionFloatingPointModeINTEL` seems redundant.  Could you clarify what is the difference between them?

And I have the same question for the `RoundingMode*INTEL` execution mode.

Author: The intention is that the execution modes set the default rounding/denorm/floating-point modes for the entire entry point. 
Decorations allow to overwrite the rounding/denorm/floating-point mode for all arithmetic and conversion instructions in a single function. 
I agree that the same result could be achieved with the decoration alone but could potentially require decorating each function in a module.

Author: I added the Issue 1) with the explanation.

The default floating-point operation mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be the IEEE 754 Mode as specified by the client API.
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_ | *FloatingPointModeINTEL*
|====
--
Modify Section 3 Binary form, add new sub-sections after 3.16 FP Rounding Mode:
--
[[FP_Denorm_Mode]]*3.17. FP Denorm Mode*

Denormalized values handling mode.

[cols="^.^1,15,15",options="header",width = "50%"]
|====
2+^.^| FP Denorm Mode | Enabling Capabilities

> | 0x0 | *Preserve* +

Reviewer 3: Is there is a reason to make it a bit enum instead of value enum? I don't think, we can apply both, so suggesting to change 0x0 and 0x1 to just 0 and 1.

Author: fixed

Denormalized values must be preserved. |
| 0x1 | *FlushToZero* +
Denormalized values must be flushed to zero. |
|====
[[FP_Operation_Mode]]*3.18. FP Operation Mode*

Floating-point operation mode.

[cols="^.^1,15,15",options="header",width = "50%"]
|====
2+^.^| FP Operation Mode | Enabling Capabilities

> | 0x0 | *IEEE* +

Reviewer 3: Same here

Author: fixed

|========================================
| Last Modified Date | 2020-12-03
| Revision           | 4
|========================================

Dependencies
------------

This extension is written against the SPIR-V Specification,
Version 1.5, Revision 3, Unified

This extension requires SPIR-V 1.0.

Overview
--------

This extension adds new execution modes and decorations to control floating-point computations.
This extension adds execution modes with round to positive infinity and round to negative infinity default rounding
and execution modes specifying compliance with floating-point arithmetic (IEEE 754) standard.
This extension adds new decorations that can be applied to a function to control floating-point computations inside the function.

Extension Name
--------------

To use this extension within a SPIR-V module, the following
*OpExtension* must be present in the module:

----
OpExtension "SPV_INTEL_float_controls2"
----

Modifications to the SPIR-V Specification, Version 1.5, Revision 3, Unified
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Modify Section 2.16.1, Universal Validation Rules:

Modify the Entry Point rules:

> Add *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* and *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* to the list of execution modes in the third rule.

Reviewer 4: Minor: I'd consider describing what "the third rule" is here, since the universal validation rules appear to have been changed in the latest SPIR-V 1.6 spec and I'm having a hard time finding the older SPIR-V 1.5 revision 3 spec.

Author: Good point, I will quote the rule:

Add *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* and *RoundingModeRTNINTEL* to the list of execution modes in the following validation rule:

- Each [OpEntryPoint](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#OpEntryPoint) must not set more than one of the DenormFlushToZero or DenormPreserve [execution modes](https://registry.khronos.org/SPIR-V/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#Execution_Mode) for any given Target Width.

Add the following rule:

> - Each OpEntryPoint must not set more than one of the *FloatingPointModeALTINTEL* or *FloatingPointModeALTINTEL* execution modes for any given _Target Width_.

Author: yes, thank you

Modify the Decoration rules, add the following rules:

- If an *OpFunction* is decorated by more than one *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* for any given _Target Width_ the _FP Rounding Mode_ operands must match.
- If an *OpFunction* is decorated by more than one *FunctionDenormModeINTEL* for any given _Target Width_ the _FP Denorm Mode_ operands must match.
- If an *OpFunction* is decorated by more than one *FunctionFloatingPointModeINTEL* for any given _Target Width_ the _FP Operation Mode_ operands must match.

Modify Section 3.6, Execution Mode:

Add the following rule to the description of *DenormPreserve* execution mode:

If an instruction is inside of a function decorated with *FunctionDenormModeINTEL* with matching _Target Width_ operand, the denorm mode specified by *FunctionDenormModeINTEL* is applied and *DenormPreserve* is ignored.

Add the following rule to the description of *DenormFlushToZero* execution mode:

> If an instruction is inside of a function decorated with *FunctionDenormModeINTEL* with matching _Target Width_ operand, the denorm mode specified by *FunctionDenormModeINTEL* is applied and *DenormFlushToZero* is ignored.

Reviewer 4: It's fine if we defer this to a client API environment spec, but so we're thinking about it: How should these execution modes and decorations interact with program build options like `-cl-denorms-are-zero`?  Does the decoration or the build option "win"?

Author: Does `-cl-denorms-are-zero` build option cause that the corresponding **DenormPreserve** Execution Mode is present in the shader?

Reviewer 4: The `-cl-denorms-are-zero` build option is be specified when compiling SPIR-V, not when generating SPIR-V, so I think we'd need to work out the interactions between the build option and the execution mode.  I don't think this has been an issue before now because most of the compute consumers haven't moved to SPIR-V 1.4 (and hence don't need to worry about **DenormPreserve**), but it's something we'll need to figure out eventually.

Do we have a recommendation how this should work?

Add the following rule to the description of *RoundingModeRTZ* execution mode:

If an instruction is not decorated with *FPRoundingMode* and does not define a rounding mode in its description and is inside of a function decorated
with *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* with matching _Target Width_ operand, the rounding mode specified by *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* is applied and *RoundingModeRTZ* is ignored.

Add the following rows to the Execution Mode table:
--
[cols="1,20,10,10",options="header",width = "80%"]
|====
  2+^| Execution Mode  | Extra Operands | Enabling Capabilities
| 5620 | *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* +
The default rounding mode for floating-point arithmetic and conversions instructions must be round to positive infinity.
If an instruction is decorated with *FPRoundingMode* or defines a rounding mode in its description, that rounding mode is applied and *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* is ignored.
If an instruction is not decorated with *FPRoundingMode* and does not define a rounding mode in its description and is inside of a function decorated

> with *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* with matching _Target Width_ operand, the rounding mode specified by *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* is applied and *RoundingModeRTPINTEL* is ignored. +

Reviewer 4: I think we need to define "matching _Target Width_" a little more precisely, especially for operations like **OpFConvert** where there is a source width and a destination width.

Author: In this sentence, "matching" was supposed to mean the same _Target Width_ operands in the **RoundingModeRTPINTEL** execution mode and **FunctionRoundingModeINTEL** decoration.

Would the following text be better:

If an instruction is not decorated with **FPRoundingMode** and does not define a rounding mode in its description and is inside of a function decorated with **FunctionRoundingModeINTEL** whose _Target Width_ operand is the same as **RoundingModeRTPINTEL** _Target Width_ operand, the rounding mode specified by **FunctionRoundingModeINTEL** is applied and **RoundingModeRTPINTEL** is ignored. 

Only affects arithmetic instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_ and conversion instructions whose result type component width  is _Target Width_.

Reviewer 4: Sorry, I think my previous comment was unclear.

For **OpFConvert** there is the width of the source operand and the width of the result.  Which one of these is checked to determine if the _Target Width_ is matched?

This text kind of makes it seem like it is the source operand that gets checked (due to "operating on"):

> Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

That might be a little surprising though, so I'd recommend being a little more precise and explicit.

Author: > This text kind of makes it seem like it is the source operand that gets checked (due to "operating on"):
> 
> > Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.
> 
> That might be a little surprising though, so I'd recommend being a little more precise and explicit.

In my previous comment I proposed an updated text:

Only affects arithmetic instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is Target Width and conversion instructions whose result type component width is Target Width.

Reviewer 4: Ah, I think I missed this trying to parse the sentence about the rounding modes.

Do we need to differentiate between arithmetic and conversion instructions, or can we always look at the result type component width to determine if it matches the target width?

If an instruction defines a floating-point operation mode in its description, that floating-point operation mode is applied and *FloatingPointModeIEEEINTEL* is ignored.
If an instruction does not define a floating-point operation mode in its description and is inside of a function decorated with *FunctionFloatControlINTEL* with matching _Target Width_ operand,
the floating-point operation mode specified by *FunctionFloatControlINTEL* is applied and *FloatingPointModeIEEEINTEL* is ignored. +
Only affects instructions operating on a floating-point type whose component width is _Target Width_.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_ | *FloatingPointModeINTEL*
|====
--
Modify Section 3 Binary form, add new sub-sections after 3.16 FP Rounding Mode:
--
[[FP_Denorm_Mode]]*3.17. FP Denorm Mode*

Denormalized values handling mode.

[cols="^.^1,15,15",options="header",width = "50%"]
|====
2+^.^| FP Denorm Mode | Enabling Capabilities
| 0 | *Preserve* +
Denormalized values must be preserved. |
| 1 | *FlushToZero* +

> Denormalized values must be flushed to zero. |

Author: We already have corresponding execution modes whose description uses "is flushed to zero" or "is preserved". We could do the same here (instead of _must_ ) and defer to Client API spec.
Note: Vulkan spec defines a list of instructions that _must_ flush to zero or preserve. Other instructions _may_ flush to zero or preserve.

_Target Width_ is an unsigned 32-bit integer.
| <<Literal, 'Literal'>> _Target Width_ | *FloatingPointModeINTEL*
|====
--
Modify Section 3 Binary form, add new sub-sections after 3.16 FP Rounding Mode:
--
[[FP_Denorm_Mode]]*3.17. FP Denorm Mode*

Denormalized values handling mode.

[cols="^.^1,15,15",options="header",width = "50%"]
|====
2+^.^| FP Denorm Mode | Enabling Capabilities
| 0x0 | *Preserve* +
Denormalized values must be preserved. |
| 0x1 | *FlushToZero* +
Denormalized values must be flushed to zero. |
|====
[[FP_Operation_Mode]]*3.18. FP Operation Mode*

Floating-point operation mode.

[cols="^.^1,15,15",options="header",width = "50%"]
|====
2+^.^| FP Operation Mode | Enabling Capabilities
| 0x0 | *IEEE* +
Floating-point operation mode is IEEE 754 Mode. |
| 0x1 | *ALT* +
Floating-point operation mode is Alternative Mode. |
|====
--

Modify Section 3.20, Decoration, add the following rows to the Decoration table:

--
[cols="1,20,5,5,10",options="header",width = "80%"]
|====
  2+^| Decoration  2+| Extra Operands | Enabling Capabilities
| 5822 | *FunctionRoundingModeINTEL* +

> Apply to a function to overwrite the default rounding mode for all floating-point arithmetic and conversion instructions inside the function.

Reviewer 2: I think that description of new execution modes like `RoundingModeRTPINTEL` should be updated as well - it explicitly states that `FPRoundingMode` rounding mode overrides global rounding mode, but we probably need to document the relationships between:
- `RoundingModeRTPINTEL` and `FunctionRoundingModeINTEL`, i.e. between execution mode and function-wide mode
- `FunctionRoundingModeINTEL` and `FPRoundingMode`, i.e. between function-wide and per-instruction mode

Author: I added new rules to describe the interactions you mentioned.
